One, two, three, four, one, two, three, four,
testing. One, two, three, four, one, two, three,
four, testing. This is bringing philosophers to
life in the background somewhere. Get that on him.
This is Monday, April the 2nd, and we're in the
Heritage Preservation Outer Office in the
library, and I have the honor and pleasure of
interviewing Dr. Jack Campbell about his work
three decades of service here at Texas A&M. To
begin with, Jack, to introduce yourself to anyone
who listens or who reads, give a biographical
summary of yourself growing up, where, when, what
did mom and dad do, high school, college,
experience before you came to A&M. Well, the year
of my birth was 1927 when Lindbergh flew across the
Atlantic. I was born in Chicago, Illinois. My
father was working for Armour and Company as one of
the earliest personnel or industrial engineers.
He was originally from Duluth, Minnesota. My
mother was from Indiana, and my parents met at the
University of Indiana in the 1920s. We lived in an
apartment in Chicago. until I was about seven.
Went to school in the city when the Depression was
starting, and it was pretty rough. And my
experience in school was great if I didn't get
knocked down at least one or two times. About
the time I was seven, we moved out to Downers Grove,
which was 20 miles west of Chicago. and my father
would take the train into work and I had the
advantages of going to suburban schools. I
graduated from high school in 1945. Which high
school? Downers Grove High School. They just had
one high school. I was president of the senior
class,
somewhat active in school. But it was the last year
the Cubs won the pennant, I remember, in 1945. It
sticks in my mind. From there, I was 4F for the Army.
The war was about over and I failed. I had heart
murmur and bad ears. And so I went to college at
Cornell in Mount Vernon, Iowa and majored in
history.
When I graduated in 1949, I wasn't sure what I was
going to do, but I always wanted to be a writer. And I
thought the great American novel would be in the
Chicago Stockyards, the slaughterhouse of the
world. So I got a job as an industrial engineer at
Armors, but didn't care for it too much and decided
I'd go into teaching after a year of industrial
engineering. And I applied to the University of
Illinois to get teacher certification. And I got a
job in the summer of 1950 as a camp counselor in New
Hampshire. 25th of June of that year, the Korean
War started. I was one of the first to be called in,
and this time I passed the physical. But I was
already at the University of Illinois and was
deferred until the end of the school year. at which
time I entered the Navy on July the 9th, 1951, for a
four-year enlistment, serving at the Atlantic
Fleet headquarters in Norfolk, aboard a heavy
cruiser, the Macon, and then the last year with a
squadron at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. On discharge,
I...
I went back to the University of Illinois for a year
to finish a master's and a teaching certificate,
and got married.
How much of this? Is this all right? I don't want to
use too much tape, because I've got a lot of
marriages. Anyway, my wife was a singer, and she'd
been on Broadway in The King and I as the chorus, and
she wanted to come back to New York, so I got a job
after I was certified at Manhasset on Long Island
while she tried to get a job on Broadway again.
After about two years of teaching there, I was
discouraged and wanted to work on a doctorate. I
had been taking a few courses at Columbia. About
the time my marriage was breaking up, I decided to
go full time at Columbia Teachers College, where I
worked with my master's leader was Dr. Lawrence
Kremen.
After about two years, I got a teaching job at
Cranford, New Jersey. became the chairman of the
history department at the high school, taught
there about five years, completed the doctorate
with a dissertation on Colonel Francis W. Parker,
a father of progressive education. The next thing
I did was to get a job as teaching at Brooklyn
College. where I taught some foundation history
and philosophy courses, but mostly supervised
social studies teachers in the various schools of
Brooklyn. It was a very fine experience,
teaching-wise. But the commute from New Jersey
was two hours each way. And I started looking for
another position and was chosen as the head of the
Department of Education at Lycoming College in
Williamsport, Pennsylvania. And there, in a
small liberal arts college, I developed the
programs and taught supervised student
teachers, but was not able to fully develop my
interest in the history and philosophy of
education. In 1970, I met Glenn Johnson. who was
head of the education department at Texas A&M when
I was at a meeting in Chicago. And we liked each
other, and he invited me to come down to look at
Texas A&M. Before I got there, I believe President
Rutter, who I had heard so much about, had died. I
was offered a position and came to Texas A&M in the
fall of 1970.
As far as you know, was there a search committee?
Oh, yes. They were developing the College of
Education, which had been established one year
earlier. It had been a department. and they were
looking for foundation people. Glenn Johnson was
also a graduate of Teachers College Columbia. The
man I was named after was Carnegie. They called him
Andy. And he had taught economics at Texas A&M.
Before that had been a vice president for some
insurance company. And he had recommended Texas
A&M to me, Andy Carnegie. When you and Glenn
met at a professional meeting, as far as you knew,
what was this position? What was it described as
being? The position was described as in
foundations of education, which was exactly what
I had been prepared to do, but had been doing
everything at Lycoming College. So it was ideal
for me, and I thought it would be a wonderful place
for the children. Now, as far as you knew, what did
you know about Texas A&M at that point? Only that it
was a wonderful place from Andy Carnegie, who was
not exactly my godfather, but he had been my
father's boss at Armoring Company, and my father
thought he'd make points by naming me after him,
but he left Armors. Spell his last name.
K-E-N-A-G-Y.
He was quite active in the community as well as in
economics and was one of the founders of the, I
think it's the retirement nursing home,
Briarcrest. And he was on the Governor's
Commission for Aging. So what you knew about A&M at
that time was positive. Positive. As far as you
knew, what was A&M like before you came to? Well, I
was very ignorant of Texas and wasn't just sure of
the geography. I didn't know up from down or Dallas
from Houston. I had to look at a map. had never
really considered Texas. But I had the wonderful
glowing accounts from Andy Carnegie.
So I came here, and from the very first moment I fell
in love with it. The trees were in bloom. It was
spring, I guess. The students were so friendly. Up
north at Lycoming, the teacher was the enemy of the
people. Down here, the students seemed to be so
friendly and so nice. I remember I stepped on the
grass looking at a tree, and a student very
politely told me it was sacred ground. It
impressed me very much. Just fell in love with the
university from the very first moment. As far as
you know, were you the only person interviewed for
this job? At the time I came down for the interview,
I was the only one. There were others. I remember
Jim Rollins was one of them. hired at the same time,
but I was the only one, and I went through the
various stages of ultimately getting to meet Dean
Hubert, who was, of course, very impressive.
Describe your first impression of Frank Hubert.
Well, he impressed me as being extremely
insightful
and As I got to know him better later, I realized he
was not only insightful, but he was very powerful.
He was kind of like a Toscanini. He made you play
better than you knew how to. I had great respect for
him. There was also another man, and I can't
remember his name, who I was working with. Dean
Hubert, and developing an off-campus program
that was quite extensive. Did Hubert ask you some
key questions?
Well, I'm sure he did, but I've lost the key to that.
It wasn't just you got acquainted session? Oh, no,
no. He asked me questions about my education,
about my position. I don't believe he asked me
anything about my slant, my philosophy of
education, although we talked, I'm sure, about
philosophy.
Who were the other key people you met with on that
list? Well, the one person I can't think of is I left
shortly after I got here. But, of course, Glenn
Johnson was one of the—well, sponsored me,
actually. I remember talking with Bob Schuetz,
who became a very good friend of mine later. At that
time, he was in the curriculum
development at our department.
I'm sorry, I can't think of the name of this. As you
understood it, you were going to be responsible
for what courses and what specialties? I was going
to work with the introductory courses, which were
called foundations. There was the history of
American education, and then there was the
history of a world education. There were the two
basic courses that they had. These were
undergraduate. We did not have the graduate
program, but I was told that they would have you
work on a graduate program as I moved along. I was
also interested in the comparative education.
There was a Pan-American dimension that was going
on at this time, connecting the university with
Mexico. Comparative education was also one of my
fields at Columbia. And so they made the offer, and
this is the only dollar question we're going to
ask. What was your beginning salary? I can
remember it very well. It was $17,000, and I think
at the time I was making around $10,000 as chairman
of the Department of Education at Lycoming, maybe
$11,000. So this was, I couldn't believe the
salary. And I'm assuming that the living costs
here were not higher. No, no, it was much, much
better. And housing was much better. As a matter of
fact, the day I was interviewed, I was also shown
around by a real estate agent to get an idea of the
housing. And there weren't any apartments at the
time, very few, it seemed as though, but houses
were readily available. And so you moved down here
then in the fall or summer? In summer. Moved in the
summer and got, I think it was in July, and then I
spent the rest of the summer in the library
developing bibliographies and getting
acquainted on campus. My first class was in the
fall. And as you began to get acquainted on campus,
What was your feeling about the way newcomers were
received? It was just marvelous. In fact, there
was several days of going around being told about
the insurance plan being introduced to many
aspects of the community, and even a dinner over in
the core building which introduced me to the
Corps, and it was very impressive. And I remember,
I think I spilled a little bit of coffee or
something on one of the cadets, and I wanted to pay
for the cleaning, and he refused to do that. But the
cadets were just so nice. But that was one of the
features of dinner with the Corps of Cadets. All
right, Dr. Williams wasn't yet here, General
Ludeke was the interim. Did he, by chance, welcome
people? Yes, we had a, I don't remember now if it was
just the new people or all of the faculty, but I
remember meeting him and shaking his hand at a
reception. And this was the department of what? I
was in the Department of Educational Curriculum
and Instruction. Describe that department and
who the key people were then. Our offices were in
the old academic building. My office was on the
fourth floor, and I had the big room. I had big
classes, you know, 80 or 90. Glenn Johnson was the
department head. And Bob Schuetz was in English,
Jim Rollins was new and he was in math ed. Joe Illica
was in reading.
Del Yank was in science education. But
we were like a little happy family and we were all
excited about developing our program. How many
were in the department total? Well, there were a
few who were part-time, who supervised students.
I don't think, I know there weren't more than 10.
About
how many majors were there then, do you remember?
Well, there were, we were, my memory doesn't, I
remember there were only 14,000 students on
campus. And women were new, and most of them, I
think, were in our department. But I can't
remember how many majors we had, but it was
becoming a big department in terms of majors. And
the dean office down on the second floor, I
believe, didn't he? I think the dean was in the
library, maybe. Was that possible? When we were in
the academic building, he must have been. there in
that building, but I can't picture that now. I
remember the big Liberty Bell was down on the
ground floor at the time.
What were your first impressions of A&M students
in terms of their capability and their interests
and so forth? Well, of course, I was very impressed
with how good they were and receptive to learning.
I think in the beginning, my students were not that
good in spelling and grammar, as I might have
expected, but that soon changed. But they were
very eager, very conscientious, and very
respectful. I remember being called sir, which I
wasn't sure if that was a compliment or not at
first. As a matter of fact, a little incidentally,
I had a lot of corps students and I wondered just why
so many in the corps wanted to go into education. I
was teaching the introductory course And I found
out that most of them just wanted to see what girls
were like. So that's why they were coming into
these courses. And the first year or two, about
what was the male-female ratio in your classes? I
had more women, I think, than men, even in the
beginning. I had rather large classes, not
exceptionally large, but I would have fifty or
more in some of those introductory courses. My
impression was, other than core—I also had
Reveille in one of my first classes, and I thought
the dog was so smart, he knew when the bell was
supposed to ring. and he would start growling, and
I didn't know until later that he was taught to do
that, make sure we didn't go overtime. But the
students are just marvelous. Did they tell you in
advance who Reveley was and that was okay? Yes, oh
yes, they explained to me this. He was the keeper of
the flame, so to speak, and the dog just sat there
very quietly, but about the time And at first I
thought, well, people are shuffling their feet.
He didn't like the shuffling. He thought there was
a little anxiety there and the class needed to
bark. But that alerted us to the time. We didn't
have bells. Actually, I guess this is on your
report somewhere we had a bell that blew at 8 in the
morning, and one at 12, and one at 5, and sort of like
a mill town. But we did not have bells in academic
building, to my knowledge. So we were on our own as
far as getting students out on time. Reveille
helped us. This is an editorial note. Dr. Jack
Kenny Williams came as president November the
1st, 1970. One of the agreements he was able to
obtain from the board of directors, they were then
called, the title was not yet regents, was that
they would allow him to select one of the existing
dormitories on campus and designate that
dormitory for the first semester in spring of 1971
to be a woman's dorm and open to all undergraduate
women. That decision led to a sharp increase in the
enrollment of women here, and in correlation with
that, the number of men went up also. And
the mention of Reveille should be known by
everyone that Reveille was the only non-human
animal allowed into every class, every room,
everywhere. So that here was the combination. Did
the anyone give you any orientation into Aggie
vocabulary, traditions, habits? How did you
learn about this institution's traditions?
Well, of course I was interested in the history
because it was my field and I I think I pursued as
much as I could the background. I don't recall any
formal introduction. Jim Rollins, who came at the
same time as I did in math ed, had been a student
here, graduating in 1952. He helped me a great deal
with the traditions. I was very much interested in
them.
had hoped that I might write a biography of Earl
Rudder. I knew the history of A&M was being written
at that time. I made some overtures, but someone
else was going to be doing it. So I missed out on
that, but no one ever did it. I think his biography
is not developed. No, not done yet. To whom did you
turn for advice in those early semesters? I think
Glenn Johnson was just a marvelous leader and
congenial person. He'd had me over to his house for
dinner, my wife and I.
He was, I would say, my main mentor. Bob Schutz and I
became very close. His birthday was one day after
mine. I'm a day older than he is. We became quite
close. As I say, we were such a small group, we often
went to lunch together and worked on ideas over the
lunch every day. Where did you and friends like
that, where did you all have coffee and then where
did you have lunch? It was in the MSC. I've
forgotten just where it was now. It was not the big,
it was just a little side area. And then they
developed a line later. I think we called it the
snack bar. Snack bar. And then the food developed
more sophistication as we went along. But we'd get
a table and chat and talk. Sometimes we brought a
bag lunch. And where did you park? I had various
parking places and for the first five years I think
1970 to around 1975 or 76, I rode my bicycle. It was
only about two and a half miles, and in the morning
it was cool enough, so I didn't work up a lot of
sweat.
There was no locking of bicycles, just left them
there. And there weren't many bikes then, were
there? No. Later I had various parking lots. One of
the last ones I remember was where that building is
now. that has all the air conditioning and
equipment. I forgot just what the name of that
building is, but that was one of the best parking
lots. But for the first five years I think I rode my
bicycle. What were your assumed guidelines, your
personal guidelines for the hours you were on
campus and your dress and so forth. The policy was
to be in your office at all times, which I rather
liked because it gave me a chance to get prepared
and do my research. If I went home, I'd play with the
children all the time, so when I would go home in the
I don't believe the first few years I had night
classes. Later on, most of my classes were at
night. But I liked that full time. And so students
were free to come in at any time. I was in the office
all the time. And so you got here about eight and
stayed until about? Oh, at least five. Yes, I could
remember a time or two on my bicycle hearing the
bell, you know, the whistle that blew all over town
and realized I was going to be late to my office. I
was not late to class, but I, you could, you always
knew what time it was. This is another editorial
note and typist tacked this back up on to the first
editorial note about Dr. Williams. And I think
maybe his second year here, some small group of
faculty went to him to complain about the whistle
that blew at 8 o'clock, 12 o'clock, 1 o'clock, and 5
o'clock that it made them feel like they were
factory workers. And so he immediately had it
terminated. Many others were disappointed that
that was terminated because that, for years and
years, had been a signal for the College Station
neighborhood near the campus Parents told their
children, when you hear the 5 o'clock whistle,
that's time for you to come back home. And the 12
o'clock, 1 o'clock was used by the A&M
consolidated school system always, so there were
two sides to the argument. Yeah. But President
Williams blew the whistle on it, is that right?
Yeah, that's right, yeah. He blew the whistle on
the whistle. What was the, in terms of the general
appearance of the faculty in those days? What did
a... Oh, we all was required to wear a coat and tie.
And of course that was my working uniform anyway.
And I don't, if I can add to it, I think it was in the
energy crisis that we had the right to bear arms, so
to speak. But yes, we were very formal, but coat and
tie was the regular uniform of the day. And what
about beards and long hair? I don't think, I never
tried to pass that one, but I don't believe I saw
anyone. Did anyone say anything about the coat and
tie? No, I don't believe they ever did. It was just
what you did. I mean, I had done that as a professor
at Brooklyn College and Lycoming College also. It
was expected. And was it common for you and your
colleagues to check the roll? in those days to keep
attendance? Oh, yes. Attendance was very vital. I
kept attendance throughout my career at A&M. Same
here, same here. We were still in that era posting
grades on our door. in the history department. Did
you all do that? Well, I remember it later, but I
don't remember the first few years. I remember
that later we posted grades, then they put Social
Security numbers down, and I think finally that
disappeared, but I don't think they did it the
first few years in education. Do you remember any
anecdotes or stories about Aggie Texans giving
you new excuses for missing the class or anything
like that? Do you remember some anecdotes about
that? Well, you know, there's wonderful
anecdotes. I may get them mixed up with
Well,
there
was always this death in the family. I
think one of them was that he couldn't get to class
because a couple of his cows got out of the yard.